A computer scientist is an IT professional who analyzes and researches how computers use and store information. They study mathematics, physics, and other technological concepts. In addition, computer scientists may collaborate with other professionals, such as computer engineers, to design advanced computer systems.
They can also specialize in different areas, such as computer programming, system analysis, or network administration. These professionals may also work in different roles in the IT industry, including:
Computer applications
Theoretical computer science
Software engineering
Computer systems
Related: 14 Computer Science Salaries and Jobs (With Common Duties)
Typical duties of computer scientists
Although the roles of a computer scientist may vary depending on the industry and organization, common duties for these professionals include:
Gathering information: Computer scientists gather, interpret, and assess different data and information.
Creating programs, applications, and websites: These professionals write and program software systems, create websites, and develop applications for devices.
Conceptualizing problems: These professionals also conceptualize computational and mathematical problems.
Developing mathematical models: They develop, test, and validate mathematical models for better computer interactions.
Researching focus areas: Computer scientists also research focus areas, such as numerical analysis and data structure, information and database theories, and algorithms.
Experimenting with technological fields: These professionals experiment and study technological fields such as virtual reality, robotics, and artificial intelligence.
Creating new computing languages: They also create new algorithms and computing languages to improve the efficiency of technology systems.
Developing new solutions: These professionals conduct experiments to validate new solutions and work with engineers, programmers, and other IT professionals to create solutions.
Innovating ideas: Computer scientists innovate new ideas to help enhance technology's effective and sustainable development.
How to become a computer scientist
Here's a step-by-step process for you to follow if you want to become a computer scientist:
1. Get a bachelor's degree
The specific requirements for a computer scientist role may vary depending on the industry and organization. Employers typically require you to complete an undergraduate program in computer science or any related field. You can apply to these programs in different tertiary institutions or complete the program online. It's important for your undergraduate coursework to include data structures, mathematics, programming, operating systems, and algorithms.
2. Develop coding skills
It's essential for you to familiarize yourself with different programming languages and have a good understanding of coding. You can take relevant courses on the subject or enrol in mentorship and internship programs with professionals who are experts in the field. Although a good understanding of coding and programming language may not be necessary for entry-level roles, learning these skills may help you when applying for a role.
3. Consider earning an advanced degree
You can earn a master's degree or a doctorate to provide you with opportunities to specialize in a particular field and advance your career. A master's degree program typically lasts for two years, and a doctorate may last four years. Some focus areas for a master's degree include computer modelling, experimental design, and databases. In addition, doctorates may include teaching, research work, and further specialization in areas like human-computer interaction and robotics.
4. Pursue available roles
Applying for entry-level roles, such as junior software developer, is a potential approach to building a career as a computer scientist. These entry-level roles can provide you with the relevant experience to apply for advanced roles that require proficient knowledge of programming languages, algorithms, and data structures. These roles equip you with the relevant skills to advance your career as a computer scientist.
Related: 14 Fields of Computer Science to Explore as a Career Choice
5. Continue learning
The field of technology is constantly changing. As a result, it's important for you to remain up-to-date on the recent developments in the industry. Although employers may not require you to continue your education, it's advisable to seek classes, courses, certifications, and conferences that can help you improve your work performance. Continuous learning makes you more valuable in your workplace, allows you to advance your career, and may inspire new techniques and ideas.
Necessary skills for a computer scientist
Computer scientists require soft and hard skills to perform their duties. Some of these skills include:
Technical and mathematical skills
Technical skills include different hard skills that computer scientists use to perform various tasks, such as hardware engineering, computer programming, software development, and technical writing. In addition to technical skills, these professionals also apply their mathematical knowledge to complete different tasks. Computer scientists typically have foundational knowledge in different areas of mathematics, including statistics, linear algebra, calculus, and discrete mathematics.
Project management skills
Computer scientists apply project management skills to manage and lead their team members during their projects. It's essential to know how to strategize, anticipate outcomes, budget, and mitigate the effects of risks on a project. These skills are essential in developing, planning, and initiating technical projects to ensure they progress from development to delivery.
Analytical skills
Some examples of analytical skills that computer scientists use on the job include experimentation with technical applications and data analysis. These professionals rely on their analytical skills to evaluate, test, and document data, and apply different evaluation techniques to complete data-driven tasks. In addition, they know how to present and communicate the results of their analysis for others to understand.
Problem-solving skills
Identifying issues and creating solutions using logical and systematic approaches are essential skills that may help you succeed as a computer scientist. It's important to know the right solutions to apply when faced with difficult challenges. Knowing how to apply a systematic approach in the decision-making process is an essential problem-solving skill that can help you build a career in the field.
Critical thinking skills
Creative thinking entails synthesizing and evaluating information to solve a problem or reach the desired outcome. Computer scientists typically work with complex technology. As a result, it's essential to develop excellent critical thinking skills to ensure you can carry out your responsibilities. Excellent critical thinking skills help you assess and evaluate different approaches to find the best fit for a project. It also helps you reduce the time it takes to complete technical tasks.
Technical writing skills
Although not all computer scientists use technical writing, it's an important skill to have in your repertoire. Technical writing allows you to communicate technical and complex information to others so that they can understand it. As a computer scientist, you can use your technical writing skills to document project data, write manuals, and apply them in areas where technical documentation is necessary.
Creativity
Creative thinking is essential to building a career as a computer scientist. For example, software engineers and developers use their creativity to develop new programs and applications and make innovations in existing programs. These skills are essential for developing and strategizing new methods and approaches for completing different projects.
Teamwork and interpersonal skills
Computer scientists typically work in teams with other professionals. As a result, it's important for you to have excellent teamwork and interpersonal skills to help you successfully navigate these work environments. It's essential to know how to direct, delegate, share ideas, collaborate, and understand the perspective of others when working in the same environment.
Communication skills
Effective communication skills are an essential trait for any professional. As a computer scientist, your duties may require focusing on written communication. For example, computer scientists working on a large project may convey ideas, relay information, and share data with others through writing. It's also important for you to have strong oral communication and active listening skills to build a successful career as a computer scientist.